Update proposal to match new design (#2)
g-gaston/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20240807-in-place-updates.md

An External Update Extension implementing custom update strategies will report the subset of changes they know how to perform. Cluster API will orchestrate the different extensions, polling the update progress from them.

> If the totality of the required changes cannot be covered by the defined extensions, Cluster API will by default fall back to the current behavior (rolling update).

Author: ```suggestion
If the totality of the required changes cannot be covered by the defined extensions, Cluster API will fall back to the current behavior (rolling update).
```
no need for "by default" since there is not way to disable it

## Motivation

> Cluster API by default performs rollouts by creating a new machine and deleting the old one. At the current alpha stage of the in-place updates feature, the default rolling update is always enabled and cannot be turned off.

Author: ```suggestion
Cluster API by default performs rollouts by creating a new machine and deleting the old one.
```

i'm not sure this sentence makes sense here in the beginning of the motivation, maybe we need to move it somewhere else? like maybe where we explain how the fallback works?

#### Fallback to Immutable rollouts

> If external update extensions can not cover the totality of the desired changes, users WILL defer to Cluster API’s default, immutable rollouts. This is important for a couple of reasons:

Author: ```suggestion
If external update extensions can not cover the totality of the desired changes, CAPI WILL defer to Cluster API’s default, immutable rollouts. This is important for a couple of reasons:
```
right? users don't have a say here

- Support External Update Extensions for both Control Plane (KCP or others) and MachineDeployment controlled machines.
- Allow in-place updates for single-node clusters without the requirement to reprovision hosts.

### Non-Goals/Future work

- To provide rollbacks in case of an in-place update failure. Failed updates need to be fixed manually by the user on the machine or by replacing the machine.

> - Introduce any changes to KCP(or any other control plane provider),MachineDeployment, MachineSet, Machine APIs.

Author: ```suggestion
- Introduce any changes to KCP (or any other control plane provider), MachineDeployment, MachineSet, Machine APIs.
```

## Proposal

We propose a pluggable update strategy architecture that allows External Update Extension to handle the update process.

> Initially, this feature will be implemented without affecting the current functionality of Cluster API. It will follow Kubernetes' feature gate mechanism and be contained within the experimental package. This means that any changes in behavior are controlled by the feature gate `InPlaceUpdates`, which must be enabled by users for the new in-place updates workflow to be available. It is disabled unless explicitly configured.

Author: > Initially, this feature will be implemented without affecting the current functionality of Cluster API.

What does this mean exactly? the plan was never to change current behavior, and probably never will. It only adds optional alternative behavior. 

Or do we her mean that initially we won't modify any of the existing APIs? if that's the case, i would just say that

        participant hook as External updater
    end

    Operator->>+apiserver: Make changes to KCP
    apiserver->>+capi: Notify changes
    apiserver->>-Operator: OK
    loop For all External Updaters
        capi->>+hook: Can update?
        hook->>capi: Supported changes
    end
    capi->>capi: Decide Update Strategy
    loop For all machine
        capi->>apiserver: Mark Machine as pending and set UpToDate condition
        apiserver->>mach: Notify changes
        loop For all External Updaters
            mach->>hook: Run updater
        end

>         mach->>apiserver: Mark Machine as Done

Author: I find this a bit confusing.

maybe

 mach->>apiserver: Mark Hooks in Machine as Done

Reviewer: can we resolve all diagram questions in Danil's PR?

>         capi->>capi: Set UpToDate condition

Author: should this be?
```suggestion
        capi->>apiserver: Set UpToDate condition
```

    end
```

When configured, external updates will, roughly, follow these steps:
1. CP/MD Controller: detect an update is required.
2. CP/MD Controller: query defined update extensions, and based on the response decides if an update should happen in-place.
3. CP/MD Controller: mark machines as pending using `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/internal/hooks.MarkAsPending()` function to track that updaters should be called.

> 4. CP/MD Controller: set `UpToDate` condition on machines to `False`.

Author: i wonder if this should be done by the machine controller when it sees the hook annotation

Reviewer: If CP/MD controller sets the condition initially maybe it should own it entirely? This way we keep it in the same place and avoid confusion about where it's set to true/false

        participant hook as External updater
    end

    Operator->>+apiserver: Make changes to KCP
    apiserver->>+capi: Notify changes
    apiserver->>-Operator: OK
    loop For all External Updaters
        capi->>+hook: Can update?
        hook->>capi: Supported changes
    end
    capi->>capi: Decide Update Strategy

>     loop For all machine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    loop For all Machines
```

Both `KCP` and `MachineDeployment` controllers follow a similar pattern around updates, they first detect if an update is required and then based on the configured strategy follow the appropiate update logic (note that today there is only one valid strategy, `RollingUpdate`).

> With `InPlaceUpdates` feature gate enabled, CAPI controllers will compute the set of desired changes and iterate over the registered external updaters, requesting through the Runtime Hook the set of changes each updater can handle. The changes supported by an updater can be the complete set of desired changes, a subset of them or an empty set, signaling it cannot handle any of the desired changes.

Author: i think this is not accurate anymore right?
capi makes the strategy decision with static information, just using the "register" info of each hook, which need to define statically what fields it can update

> If any updater can handle the desired then CAPI will determine that the update can be performed using the external strategy. 

Author: i don't follow this sentence

Reviewer: it should be:
```suggestion
If any updater can handle the desired changes then CAPI will determine that the update can be performed using the external strategy. 
```

> If after iterating over all external updaters a change could not be handled by any of them, CAPI will determine the desired state cannot be reached through external updaters. In this case, it will fallback to the rolling update strategy, replacing machines as needed. 

Author: ```suggestion
If any of the desired changes cannot be covered by the updaters capabilities, CAPI will determine the desired state cannot be reached through external updaters. In this case, it will fallback to the rolling update strategy, replacing machines as needed. 
```

> In the future, depending on the scenario, users might: ammend the desired state to something that the registered updaters can cover or register additional updaters capable of handling the desired changes. However, at this stage of the proposal, these options are not supported, and the rolling update strategy remains the only default fallback.

Author: maybe worth moving this idea to future work?

Both `KCP` and `MachineDeployment` controllers follow a similar pattern around updates, they first detect if an update is required and then based on the configured strategy follow the appropiate update logic (note that today there is only one valid strategy, `RollingUpdate`).

With `InPlaceUpdates` feature gate enabled, CAPI controllers will compute the set of desired changes and iterate over the registered external updaters, requesting through the Runtime Hook the set of changes each updater can handle. The changes supported by an updater can be the complete set of desired changes, a subset of them or an empty set, signaling it cannot handle any of the desired changes.

> If any updater can handle the desired changes then CAPI will determine that the update can be performed using the external strategy. 

Author: nit: maybe this could be misleading? It's not really any updater but "any combination of the updaters". wdyt?

Reviewer: yes, thanks, that sounds better

end

Operator->>apiserver: make changes to MD
apiserver->>capi: Notify changes
apiserver->>Operator: OK
capi->>capi: Decide Update Strategy
capi->>apiserver: Create new MachineSet
loop For all machines
    capi->>apiserver: Mark as pending and move to new Machine Set
    apiserver->>msc: Notify changes
    msc->>apiserver: Update Machine Spec and set UpToDate condition
    apiserver->>mach: Notify changes
    loop For all updaters in plan
        mach->>hook: Run updater
    end
    mach->>apiserver: Mark Machine as done
    msc->>apiserver: Set UpToDate condition
end
```

The MachineDeployment controller updates machines in place in a very similar way to rolling updates: by creating a new MachineSet and moving the machines from the old MS to the new one. We want to stress that the Machine objects won't be deleted and recreated like in the current rolling strategy. The MachineDeployment will just update the OwnerRefs and labels, effectively moving the existing Machine object from one MS to another. The number of machines moved at once might be made configurable on the MachineDeployment in the same way `maxSurge` and `maxUnavailable` control this for rolling updates.

> When the new MachineSet controller sees a new Machine with an outdated spec, it updates the spec to match the one in the MS. This update together with marking machine as pending and setting a condition is what triggers the Machine controller to start executing 

Author: who sets the hook annotation and the uptodate condition here? MD controller or MS controller?

    participant hook as External updater
end

Operator->>apiserver: make changes to KCP
apiserver->>capi: Notify changes
apiserver->>Operator: OK
capi->>capi: Decide Update Strategy
loop For all machines
    capi->>apiserver: Mark Machine as pending and set UpToDate condition
    apiserver->>mach: Notify changes
    loop For all External Updaters
        mach->>hook: Run updater
    end
        mach->>apiserver: Mark Hooks in Machine as Done
        capi->>capi: Set UpToDate condition
end
```

> The KCP external updates will work in a very similar way to MachineDeployments but removing the MachineSet level of indirection. In this case, it's the KCP controller the one in charge of arking machine as pending, setting a condition, and also updating the Machine spec. This follows this same pattern as for rolling updates, where the KCP controller directly creates and deletes Machines. Machines will be updated one by one, sequentially.

Author: ```suggestion
The KCP external updates will work in a very similar way to MachineDeployments but removing the MachineSet level of indirection. In this case, it's the KCP controller the one in charge of marking machine as pending, setting a condition, and also updating the Machine spec. This follows this same pattern as for rolling updates, where the KCP controller directly creates and deletes Machines. Machines will be updated one by one, sequentially.
```

    participant infra as Infrastructure
end

capi->>apiserver: Decide Update Strategy
capi->>apiserver: Mark Machine as pending and set UpToDate condition
apiserver->>mach: Notify changes
mach->>hook: Start update
hook->>infra: Update components
loop For all External Updaters
    mach->>hook: finished?

>     hook2->>mach: try in X secs

Author: should this be 
```suggestion
    hook->>mach: try in X secs
```

end
mach->>apiserver: Mark Machine as Done
capi->>apiserver: Set UpToDate condition
```

Once a Machine is marked as pending and `UpToDate` condition is set and the Machine's spec has been updated with the desired changes, the Machine controller takes over. This controller is responsible for calling the updaters and tracking the progress of those updaters and exposing this progress in the Machine conditions.

> The Machine controller will not follow any order when calling the updaters. This might change in future iterations.

Author: ```suggestion
The Machine controller doesn't guarantee any particular order when calling the updaters. This might change in future iterations.
```

> The controller will trigger updaters by hitting another RuntimeHook endpoint (eg. `/UpdateMachine`). The updater could respond saying "update completed", "update failed" or "update in progress" with an optional "retry after X seconds". The CAPI controller will continuously poll the status of the update by hitting the same endpoint until it reaches a terminal state.

Author: ```suggestion
The controller will trigger updaters by hitting a RuntimeHook endpoint (eg. `/UpdateMachine`). The updater could respond saying "update completed", "update failed" or "update in progress" with an optional "retry after X seconds". The CAPI controller will continuously poll the status of the update by hitting the same endpoint until it reaches a terminal state.
```

CAPI expects the `/UpdateMachine` endpoint of an updater to be idempotent: for the same Machine with the same spec, the endpoint can be called any number of times (before and after it completes), and the end result should be the same. CAPI guarantees that once an `/UpdateMachine` endpoint has been called once, it won't change the Machine spec until the update reaches a terminal state.

> Once the update completes, the Machine controller will mark machine as done. If the update fails, this will be reflected in the Machine status.

Author: ```suggestion
Once the update completes, the Machine controller will mark machine's hooks as done. If the update fails, this will be reflected in the Machine status.
```

> From this point on, the `KCP` or `MachineDeployment` controller will take over and set the `UpToDate` condition to `True`.

Author: similar comment as before
wouldn't it be simpler if the machine controller did this? it's the one who knows exactly when the machine is up to date without having to derive it from the absence of an annotation like kcp or md controllers

        hook2->>capi: I can update []
        capi->>+hook: Can update [spec.version,<br>clusterConfiguration.kubernetesVersion]?
        hook->>capi: I can update [spec.version,<br>clusterConfiguration.kubernetesVersion]
        capi->>capi: Decide Update Strategy

>         capi->>apiserver: Mark Machine as pending and set UpToDate condition

Author: if we want to abbrebiate to this in the doc maybe we can define in the glossary what marking as pending and marking as done mean
those are overloaded terms imo, and here we refer specifically about pendning and done in the context of runtime extensions

Reviewer: I added a sentence to the glossary

+ version: v1.31.0
```

> The KCP computes the difference between the current CP machines (plus bootstrap config and infra machine) and their desired state and detects a difference for the machine `spec.version` and for the KubeadmConfig `spec.clusterConfiguration.kubernetesVersion`. It then starts calling the external update extensions to see if they can handle these changes.

Author: > It then starts calling the external update extensions to see if they can handle these changes.

i think this is wrong, no?

}
```

> Given that there are still changes not covered, KCP continue with the next update extension, making the same request to the `kcp-version-upgrade/CanUpdateMachine` endpoint of the `kcp-version-upgrade` extension:

Author: i think this is not correct
there is no `CanUpdateMachine` endpoint with the new design

Reviewer: How does CP/MD controller decide if an update should be done in place?

}
```

> The Machine controller then sends a simillar request to `vsphere-vm-memory-update/UpdateMachine` endpoint, since this extension has not been able to cover any of the changes, it responds with the `Done` (machine controller doesn't need to know if 

Author: i'm confused
this should not happen until the first extension returns done

Reviewer: It’s simpler if CAPI doesn’t need to know about the internals of the updaters, and we can’t guarantee the order in which updaters will be called between reconciliation loops. In my opinion, CAPI should just iterate over the updaters, and it’s up to the updaters to manage syncing and determining which one is done or in progress.

We can define the exact contract for the updater later, but I imagine the situation would look like this:
Let’s assume we updated the KCP version, like in the example.
The first `UpdateMachine` call goes to `vsphere-vm-memory-update`.
In this case, the updater doesn’t need to do anything, so it returns `Done` or something that indicates no further action is needed to update the machine to the desired state.
The second call is made to `kcp-version-upgrade`, which starts the KCP update.
Internally, the vsphere-vm-memory-update will check the InfraTemplate, for example, and perform checks to ensure no update is required on its side. The exact contracts should be defined separately.
WDYT?

Author: Oh I agree with all of that.

Maybe i misunderstood the example, but what i meant is that the call to the second updater should not be made until the call to the first updater returns done. This is to guarantee that only one updater is active at a time. So imagine your example, if you invert the order, we first call kcp updater which will take some time. What do we do after it responds "in progress"? I'm suggesting we requeue and not call the second updater yet.

That said, you make a good point: in order for this mechanism to work, the updaters need to be called in the same order on each reconciliation. I agree that capi doesn't guarantee a particular order, but i think we should guarantee that there is "an order". This then becomes an implementation detail that doesn't need to be part of this design, but I think some kind of ordering is necessary.

Reviewer: The updater can set a lock on the object and only after the lock is set, the "accepted" response is returned. I think this should be discussed in a separate proposal defining the updaters contracts.

Reviewer: My general idea is that from CAPI(Machine controller) side the process should as simple as possible and all the complexity can be moved outside of it.

Author: I see, that's an interesting take
However I find myself on the complete opposite side: i think capi should manage as much complexity as it can as long as it falls on its responsibilities

In this case, orchestrating the updater its capi's responsibility. So if we want to run updaters in a sequential manner, I think it should be capi the one that orchestrates that.

A couple of advantages i see:
* removes the need to implement the same thing on updaters again and again
* avoids issues if an updater doesn't implement the "lock" mechanism properly. Some examples: updaters that start without a lock or updaters that fail to remove the lock even after completion 
* provides deterministic behavior (using a locking mechanism would create a race towards acquiring the lock and we can't guarantee always the same behavior)
* allow us to more easily alter the orchestration algorithm without having to update all the providers

Reviewer: should we run this through maintainers?

+       name: md-1-2
```

> The `vsphere-vm-memory-update` extension informs that can cover required requested changes:

Author: same as before, this is not done by the extension
let's talk about this offline and make all related changes at once. i think we need to change everything that touches the "deciding the update strategy" and "checking desired changes coverage"

##### `CanUpdateMachine` endpoint
##### Request
> Requirements:
> * Desired Machine/Bootstrap/InfraMachine changes

##### Response
> Requirements:
> * Set of supported changes, probably an array of strings (the path in the object)
> * Error

##### `UpdateMachine` endpoint
##### Request
> Requirements:

> > *  Machine Spec, including bootstrap and and infra machine templates

Author: why do we need to include the machine spec? isn't it enough to include the machine's ref (name and namespace)?
the the updater can read it plus the bootstrap and infra machine template

##### `UpdateMachine` endpoint
##### Request
> Requirements:

> > *  Desired Machine Spec, including bootstrap and and infra machine templates

Author: why?
afaik by this point the machine object has already been updated with the desired spec

### Graduation Criteria

The initial plan is to provide support for external update strategy in the KCP and MD controllers under a feature flag (which would be unset by default) and to have the webhook API in an `alpha` stage ) which will allow us to iterate faster).

The main criteria for graduating this feature will be community adoption and API stability. Once the feature is stable, we have fixes to any known bugs and the webhook API has remained stable without backward incompatible changes for some time, we will propose to the community moving the API out of the `alpha` stage. It will then be promoted out of experimental and the feature flag for enabling/disabling the functionality will be deprecated. When this happens

> we will provide a wat to toggle the in-place possibly though the API.

Author: ```suggestion
we will provide a way to toggle the in-place possibly though the API.
```

### Graduation Criteria

The initial plan is to provide support for external update strategy in the KCP and MD controllers under a feature flag (which would be unset by default) and to have the webhook API in an `alpha` stage ) which will allow us to iterate faster).

> The main criteria for graduating this feature will be community adoption and API stability. Once the feature is stable, we have fixes to any known bugs and the webhook API has remained stable without backward incompatible changes for some time, we will propose to the community moving the API out of the `alpha` stage. It will then be promoted out of experimental and the feature flag for enabling/disabling the functionality will be deprecated.

Author: if we want to talk about removing the feature toggle we also need to mention that we will need a way to control this feature without the toggle, possibly some kind of API change.
